The Hunger Games


The Hunger Games 1by Suzanne Collins

PART I"THE TRIBUTES"

1.

When I wake up, the other side of the bed is cold. My fingers stretch out, seeking Prims warmth but
finding only the rough canvas cover of the mattress. She must have had bad dreams and climbed in
with our mother. Of course, she did. This is the day of the reaping. I prop myself up on one elbow.
Theres enough light in the bedroom to see them. My little sister, Prim, curled up on her side,
cocooned in my mothers body, their cheeks pressed together. In sleep, my mother looks younger, still
worn but not so beaten-down. Prims face is as fresh as a raindrop, as lovely as the primrose for
which she was named. My mother was very beautiful once, too. Or so they tell me. Sitting at Prims
knees, guarding her, is the worlds ugliest cat. Mashed-in nose, half of one ear missing, eyes the
color of rotting squash. Prim named him Buttercup, insisting that his muddy yellow coat matched the
bright flower. I he hates me. Or at least distrusts me. Even though it was years ago, I think he
still remembers how I tried to drown him in a bucket when Prim brought him home. Scrawny kitten,
belly swollen with worms, crawling with fleas. The last thing I needed was another mouth to feed.
But Prim begged so hard, cried even, I had to let him stay. It turned out okay. My mother got rid of
the vermin and hes a born mouser. Even catches the occasional rat. Sometimes, when I clean a kill, I
feed Buttercup the entrails. He has stopped hissing at me. Entrails. No hissing. This is the closest
we will ever come to love. I swing my legs off the bed and slide into my hunting boots. Supple
leather that has molded to my feet. I pull on trousers, a shirt, tuck my long dark braid up into a
cap, and grab my forage bag. On the table, under a wooden bowl to protect it from hungry rats and
cats alike, sits a perfect little goat cheese wrapped in basil leaves. Prims gift to me on reaping
day. I put the cheese carefully in my pocket as I slip outside. Our part of District 12, nicknamed
the Seam, is usually crawling with coal miners heading out to the morning shift at this hour. Men
and women with hunched shoulders, swollen knuckles, many who have long since stopped trying to scrub
the coal dust out of their broken nails, the lines of their sunken faces. But today the black cinder
streets are empty. Shutters on the squat gray houses are closed. The reaping isnt until two. May as
well sleep in. If you can. Our house is almost at the edge of the Seam. I only have to pass a few
gates to reach the scruffy field called the Meadow. Separating the Meadow from the woods, in fact
enclosing all of District 12, is a high chain-link fence topped with barbed-wire loops. In theory,
its supposed to be electrified twenty-four hours a day as a deterrent to the predators that live in
the woods packs of wild dogs, lone cougars, bears that used to threaten our streets. But since were
lucky to get two or three hours of electricity in the evenings, its usually safe to touch. Even so,
I always take a moment to listen carefully for the hum that means the fence is live. Right now, its
silent as a stone. Concealed by a clump of bushes, I flatten out on my belly and slide under a two-
foot stretch thats been loose for years. There are several other weak spots in the fence, but this
one is so close to home I almost always enter the woods here. As soon as Im in the trees, I retrieve
a bow and sheath of arrows from a hollow log. Electrified or not, the fence has been successful at
keeping the flesh-eaters out of District 12. Inside the woods they roam freely, and there are added
concerns like venomous snakes, rabid animals, and no real paths to follow. But theres also food if
you know how to find it. My father knew and he taught me some before he was blown to bits in a mine
explosion. There was nothing even to bury. I was eleven then. Five years later, I still wake up
screaming for him to run. Even though trespassing in the woods is illegal and poaching carries the
severest of penalties, more people would risk it if they had weapons. But most are not bold enough
to venture out with just a knife. My bow is a rarity, crafted by my father along with a few others
that I keep well hidden in the woods, carefully wrapped in waterproof covers. My father could have
made good money selling them, but if the officials found out he would have been publicly executed
for inciting a rebellion. Most of the Peacekeepers turn a blind eye to the few of us who hunt
because theyre as hungry for fresh meat as anybody is. In fact, theyre among our best customers. But
the idea that someone might be arming the Seam would never have been allowed. In the fall, a few
brave souls sneak into the woods to harvest apples. But always in sight of the Meadow. Always close
enough to run back to the safety of District 12 if trouble arises. District Twelve. Where you can
starve to death in safety, I mutter. Then I glance quickly over my shoulder. Even here, even in the
middle of nowhere, you worry someone might overhear you. When I was younger, I scared my mother to
death, the things I would blurt out about District 12, about the people who rule our country, Panem,
from the far-off city called the Capitol. Eventually I understood this would only lead us to more
trouble. So I learned to hold my tongue and to turn my features into an indifferent mask so that no
one could ever read my thoughts. Do my work quietly in school. Make only polite small talk in the
public market. Discuss little more than trades in the Hob, which is the black market where I make
most of my money. Even at home, where I am less pleasant, I avoid discussing tricky topics. Like the
reaping, or food shortages, or the Hunger Games. Prim might begin to repeat my words and then where
would we be? In the woods waits the only person with whom I can be myself. Gale. I can feel the
muscles in my face relaxing, my pace quickening as I climb the hills to our place, a rock ledge
overlooking a valley. A thicket of berry bushes protects it from unwanted eyes. The sight of him
waiting there brings on a smile. Gale says I never smile except in the woods. Hey, Catnip, says
Gale. My real name is Katniss, but when I first told him, I had barely whispered it. So he thought
Id said Catnip. Then when this crazy lynx started following me around the woods looking for
handouts, it became his official nickname for me. I finally had to kill the lynx because he scared
off game. I almost regretted it because he wasnt bad company. But I got a decent price for his pelt.
Look what I shot, Gale holds up a loaf of bread with an arrow stuck in it, and I laugh. Its real
bakery bread, not the flat, dense loaves we make from our grain rations. I take it in my hands, pull
out the arrow, and hold the puncture in the crust to my nose, inhaling the fragrance that makes my
mouth flood with saliva. Fine bread like this is for special occasions. Mm, still warm, I say. He
must have been at the bakery at the crack of dawn to trade for it. What did it cost you? Just a
squirrel. Think the old man was feeling sentimental this morning, says Gale. Even wished me luck.
Well, we all feel a little closer today, dont we? I say, not even bothering to roll my eyes. Prim
left us a cheese. I pull it out. His expression brightens at the treat. Thank you, Prim. Well have a
real feast. Suddenly he falls into a Capitol accent as he mimics Effie Trinket, the maniacally
upbeat woman who arrives once a year to read out the names at the leaping. I almost forgot! Happy
Hunger Games! He plucks a few blackberries from the bushes around us. And may the odds He tosses a
berry in a high arc toward me. I catch it in my mouth and break the delicate skin with my teeth. The
sweet tartness explodes across my tongue. Be ever in your favor! I finish with equal verve. We have
to joke about it because the alternative is to be scared out of your wits. Besides, the Capitol
accent is so affected, almost anything sounds funny in it. I watch as Gale pulls out his knife and
slices the bread. He could be my brother. Straight black hair, olive skin, we even have the same
gray eyes. But were not related, at least not closely. Most of the families who work the mines
resemble one another this way. Thats why my mother and Prim, with their light hair and blue eyes,
always look out of place. They are. My mothers parents were part of the small merchant class that
caters to officials, Peacekeepers, and the occasional Seam customer. They ran an apothecary shop in
the nicer part of District 12. Since almost no one can afford doctors, apothecaries are our healers.
My father got to know my mother because on his hunts he would sometimes collect medicinal herbs and
sell them to her shop to be brewed into remedies. She must have really loved him to leave her home
for the Seam. I try to remember that when all I can see is the woman who sat by, blank and
unreachable, while her children turned to skin and bones. I try to forgive her for my fathers sake.
But to be honest, Im not the forgiving type. Gale spreads the bread slices with the soft goat
cheese, carefully placing a basil leaf on each while I strip the bushes of their berries. We settle
back in a nook in the rocks. From this place, we are invisible but have a clear view of the valley,
which is teeming with summer life, greens to gather, roots to dig, fish iridescent in the sunlight.
The day is glorious, with a blue sky and soft breeze. The foods wonderful, with the cheese seeping
into the warm bread and the berries bursting in our mouths. Everything would be perfect if this
really was a holiday, if all the day off meant was roaming the mountains with Gale, hunting for
tonights supper. But instead we have to be standing in the square at two oclock waiting for the
names to be called out. We could do it, you know, Gale says quietly. What? I ask. Leave the
district. Run off. Live in the woods. You and I, we could make it, says Gale. I dont know how to
respond. The idea is so preposterous. If we didnt have so many kids, he adds quickly. Theyre not our
kids, of course. But they might as well be. Gales two little brothers and a sister. Prim. And you
may as well throw in our mothers, too, because how would they live without us? Who would fill those
mouths that are always asking for more? With both of us hunting daily, there are still nights when
game has to be swapped for lard or shoelaces or wool, still nights when we go to bed with our
stomachs growling. I never want to have kids, I say. I might. If I didnt live here, says Gale. But
you do, I say, irritated. Forget it, he snaps back. The conversation feels all wrong. Leave? How
could I leave Prim, who is the only person in the world Im certain I love? And Gale is devoted to
his family. We cant leave, so why bother talking about it? And even if we did . . . Even if we did .
. . Where did this stuff about having kids come from? Theres never been anything romantic between
Gale and me. When we met, I was a skinny twelve-year-old, and although he was only two years older,
he already looked like a man. It took a long time for us to even become friends, to stop haggling
over every trade and begin helping each other out. Besides, if he wants kids, Gale wont have any
trouble finding a wife. Hes good-looking, hes strong enough to handle the work in the mines, and he
can hunt. You can tell by the way the girls whisper about him when he walks by in school that they
want him. It makes me jealous but not for the reason people would think. Good hunting partners are
hard to find. What do you want to do? I ask. We can hunt, fish, or gather. Lets fish at the lake. We
can leave our poles and gather in the woods. Get something nice for tonight, he says. Tonight. After
the reaping, everyone is supposed to celebrate. And a lot of people do, out of relief that their
children have been spared for another year. But at least two families will pull their shutters, lock
their doors, and try to figure out how they will survive the painful weeks to come. We make out
well. The predators ignore us on a day when easier, tastier prey abounds. By late morning, we have a
dozen fish, a bag of greens and, best of all, a gallon of strawberries. I found the patch a few
years ago, but Gale had the idea to string mesh nets around it to keep out the animals. On the way
home, we swing by the Hob, the black market that operates in an abandoned warehouse that once held
coal. When they came up with a more efficient system that transported the coal directly from the
mines to the trains, the Hob gradually took over the space. Most businesses are closed by this time
on reaping day, but the black markets still fairly busy. We easily trade six of the fish for good
bread, the other two for salt. Greasy Sae, the bony old woman who sells bowls of hot soup from a
large kettle, takes half the greens off our hands in exchange for a couple of chunks of paraffin. We
might do a tad better elsewhere, but we make an effort to keep on good terms with Greasy Sae. Shes
the only one who can consistently be counted on to buy wild dog. We dont hunt them on purpose, but
if youre attacked and you take out a dog or two, well, meat is meat. Once its in the soup, Ill call
it beef, Greasy Sae says with a wink. No one in the Seam would turn up their nose at a good leg of
wild dog, but the Peacekeepers who come to the Hob can afford to be a little choosier. When we
finish our business at the market, we go to the back door of the mayors house to sell half the
strawberries, knowing he has a particular fondness for them and can afford our price. The mayors
daughter, Madge, opens the door. Shes in my year at school. Being the mayors daughter, youd expect
her to be a snob, but shes all right. She just keeps to herself. Like me. Since neither of us really
has a group of friends, we seem to end up together a lot at school. Eating lunch, sitting next to
each other at assemblies, partnering for sports activities. We rarely talk, which suits us both just
fine. Today her drab school outfit has been replaced by an expensive white dress, and her blonde
hair is done up with a pink ribbon. Reaping clothes. Pretty dress, says Gale. Madge shoots him a
look, trying to see if its a genuine compliment or if hes just being ironic. It is a pretty dress,
but she would never be wearing it ordinarily. She presses her lips together and then smiles. Well,
if I end up going to the Capitol, I want to look nice, dont I? Now its Gales turn to be confused.
Does she mean it? Or is she messing with him? Im guessing the second. You wont be going to the
Capitol, says Gale coolly. His eyes land on a small, circular pin that adorns her dress. Real gold.
Beautifully crafted. It could keep a family in bread for months. What can you have? Five entries? I
had six when I was just twelve years old. Thats not her fault, I say. No, its no ones fault. Just
the way it is, says Gale. Madges face has become closed off.  She puts the money for the berries in
my hand. Good luck, Katniss. You, too, I say, and the door closes. We walk toward the Seam in
silence. I dont like that Gale took a dig at Madge, but hes right, of course. The reaping system is
unfair, with the poor getting the worst of it. You become eligible for the reaping the day you turn
twelve. That year, your name is entered once. At thirteen, twice. And so on and so on until you
reach the age of eighteen, the final year of eligibility, when your name goes into the pool seven
times. Thats true for every citizen in all twelve districts in the entire country of Panem. But
heres the catch. Say you are poor and starving as we were. You can opt to add your name more times
in exchange for tesserae. Each tessera is worth a meager years supply of grain and oil for one
person. You may do this for each of your family members as well. So, at the age of twelve, I had my
name entered four times. Once, because I had to, and three times for tesserae for grain and oil for
myself, Prim, and my mother. In fact, every year I have needed to do this. And the entries are
cumulative. So now, at the age of sixteen, my name will be in the reaping twenty times. Gale, who is
eighteen and has been either helping or single-handedly feeding a family of five for seven years,
will have his name in forty-two times. You can see why someone like Madge, who has never been at
risk of needing a tessera, can set him off. The chance of her name being drawn is very slim compared
to those of us who live in the Seam. Not impossible, but slim. And even though the rules were set up
by the Capitol, not the districts, certainly not Madges family, its hard not to resent those who
dont have to sign up for tesserae. Gale knows his anger at Madge is misdirected. On other days, deep
in the woods, Ive listened to him rant about how the tesserae are just another tool to cause misery
in our district. A way to plant hatred between the starving workers of the Seam and those who can
generally count on supper and thereby ensure we will never trust one another. Its to the Capitols
advantage to have us divided among ourselves, he might say if there were no ears to hear but mine.
If it wasnt reaping day. If a girl with a gold pin and no tesserae had not made what Im sure she
thought was a harmless comment. As we walk, I glance over at Gales face, still smoldering underneath
his stony expression. His rages seem pointless to me, although I never say so. Its not that I dont
agree with him. I do. But what good is yelling about the Capitol in the middle of the woods? It
doesnt change anything. It doesnt make things fair. It doesnt fill our stomachs. In fact, it scares
off the nearby game. I let him yell though. Better he does it in the woods than in the district.
Gale and I divide our spoils, leaving two fish, a couple of loaves of good bread, greens, a quart of
strawberries, salt, paraffin, and a bit of money for each. See you in the square, I say. Wear
something pretty, he says flatly. At home, I find my mother and sister are ready to go. My mother
wears a fine dress from her apothecary days. Prim is in my first reaping outfit, a skirt and ruffled
blouse. Its a bit big on her, but my mother has made it stay with pins. Even so, shes having trouble
keeping the blouse tucked in at the back. A tub of warm water waits for me. I scrub off the dirt and
sweat from the woods and even wash my hair. To my surprise, my mother has laid out one of her own
lovely dresses for me. A soft blue thing with matching shoes. Are you sure? I ask. Im trying to get
past rejecting offers of help from her. For a while, I was so angry, I wouldnt allow her to do
anything for me. And this is something special. Her clothes from her past are very precious to her.
Of course. Lets put your hair up, too, she says. I let her towel-dry it and braid it up on my head.
I can hardly recognize myself in the cracked mirror that leans against the wall. You look beautiful,
says Prim in a hushed voice. And nothing like myself, I say. I hug her, because I know these next
few hours will be terrible for her. Her first reaping. Shes about as safe as you can get, since shes
only entered once. I wouldnt let her take out any tesserae. But shes worried about me. That the
unthinkable might happen. I protect Prim in every way I can, but Im powerless against the reaping.
The anguish I always feel when shes in pain wells up in my chest and threatens to register on my
(ace. I notice her blouse has pulled out of her skirt in the back again and force myself to stay
calm. Tuck your tail in, little duck, I say, smoothing the blouse back in place. Prim giggles and
gives me a small Quack. Quack yourself, I say with a light laugh. The kind only Prim can draw out of
me. Come on, lets eat, I say and plant a quick kiss on the top of her head. The fish and greens are
already cooking in a stew, but that will be for supper. We decide to save the strawberries and
bakery bread for this evenings meal, to make it special we say. Instead we drink milk from Prims
goat, Lady, and eat the rough bread made from the tessera grain, although no one has much appetite
anyway. At one oclock, we head for the square. Attendance is mandatory unless you are on deaths
door. This evening, officials will come around and check to see if this is the case. If not, youll
be imprisoned. Its too bad, really, that they hold the reaping in the square one of the few places
in District 12 that can be pleasant. The squares surrounded by shops, and on public market days,
especially if theres good weather, it has a holiday feel to it. But today, despite the bright
banners hanging on the buildings, theres an air of grimness. The camera crews, perched like buzzards
on rooftops, only add to the effect. People file in silently and sign in. The reaping is a good
opportunity for the Capitol to keep tabs on the population as well. Twelve- through eighteen-year-
olds are herded into roped areas marked off by ages, the oldest in the front, the young ones, like
Prim, toward the back. Family members line up around the perimeter, holding tightly to one anothers
hands. But there are others, too, who have no one they love at stake, or who no longer care, who
slip among the crowd, taking bets on the two kids whose names will be drawn. Odds are given on their
ages, whether theyre Seam or merchant, if they will break down and weep. Most refuse dealing with
the racketeers but carefully, carefully. These same people tend to be informers, and who hasnt
broken the law? I could be shot on a daily basis for hunting, but the appetites of those in charge
protect me. Not everyone can claim the same. Anyway, Gale and I agree that if we have to choose
between dying of hunger and a bullet in the head, the bullet would be much quicker. The space gets
tighter, more claustrophobic as people arrive. The squares quite large, but not enough to hold
District 12s population of about eight thousand. Latecomers are directed to the adjacent streets,
where they can watch the event on screens as its televised live by the state. I find myself standing
in a clump of sixteens from the Seam. We all exchange terse nods then focus our attention on the
temporary stage that is set up before the Justice Building. It holds three chairs, a podium, and two
large glass balls, one for the boys and one for the girls. I stare at the paper slips in the girls
ball. Twenty of them have Katniss Everdeen written on them in careful handwriting. Two of the three
chairs fill with Madges father, Mayor Undersee, whos a tall, balding man, and Effie Trinket,
District 12s escort, fresh from the Capitol with her scary white grin, pinkish hair, and spring
green suit. They murmur to each other and then look with concern at the empty seat. Just as the town
clock strikes two, the mayor steps up to the podium and begins to read. Its the same story every
year. He tells of the history of Panem, the country that rose up out of the ashes of a place that
was once called North America. He lists the disasters, the droughts, the storms, the fires, the
encroaching seas that swallowed up so much of the land, the brutal war for what little sustenance
remained. The result was Panem, a shining Capitol ringed by thirteen districts, which brought peace
and prosperity to its citizens. Then came the Dark Days, the uprising of the districts against the
Capitol. Twelve were defeated, the thirteenth obliterated. The Treaty of Treason gave us the new
laws to guarantee peace and, as our yearly reminder that the Dark Days must never be repeated, it
gave us the Hunger Games. The rules of the Hunger Games are simple. In punishment for the uprising,
each of the twelve districts must provide one girl and one boy, called tributes, to participate. The
twenty-four tributes will be imprisoned in a vast outdoor arena that could hold anything from a
burning desert to a frozen wasteland. Over a period of several weeks, the competitors must fight to
the death.  The last tribute standing wins. Taking the kids from our districts, forcing them to kill
one another while we watch this is the Capitols way of reminding us how totally we are at their
mercy. How little chance we would stand of surviving another rebellion. Whatever words they use, the
real message is clear. Look how we take your children and sacrifice them and theres nothing you can
do. If you lift a finger, we will destroy every last one of you. Just as we did in District
Thirteen. To make it humiliating as well as torturous, the Capitol requires us to treat the Hunger
Games as a festivity, a sporting event pitting every district against the others. The last tribute
alive receives a life of ease back home, and their district will be showered with prizes, largely
consisting of food. All year, the Capitol will show the winning district gifts of grain and oil and
even delicacies like sugar while the rest of us battle starvation. It is both a time for repentance
and a time for thanks, intones the mayor. Then he reads the list of past District 12 victors. In
seventy-four years, we have had exactly two. Only one is still alive. Haymitch Abernathy, a paunchy,
middle-aged man, who at this moment appears hollering something unintelligible, staggers onto the
stage, and falls into the third chair. Hes drunk. Very. The crowd responds with its token applause,
but hes confused and tries to give Effie Trinket a big hug, which she barely manages to fend off.
The mayor looks distressed. Since all of this is being televised, right now District 12 is the
laughingstock of Panem, and he knows it. He quickly tries to pull the attention back to the reaping
by introducing Effie Trinket. Bright and bubbly as ever, Effie Trinket trots to the podium and gives
her signature, Happy Hunger Games! And may the odds be ever in your favor! Her pink hair must be a
wig because her curls have shifted slightly off-center since her encounter with Haymitch. She goes
on a bit about what an honor it is to be here, although everyone knows shes just aching to get
bumped up to a better district where they have proper victors, not drunks who molest you in front of
the entire nation. Through the crowd, I spot Gale looking back at me with a ghost of a smile. As
reapings go, this one at least has a slight entertainment factor. But suddenly I am thinking of Gale
and his forty-two names in that big glass ball and how the odds are not in his favor. Not compared
to a lot of the boys. And maybe hes thinking the same thing about me because his face darkens and he
turns away. But there are still thousands of slips, I wish I could whisper to him. Its time for the
drawing. Effie Trinket says as she always does, Ladies first! and crosses to the glass ball with the
girls names. She reaches in, digs her hand deep into the ball, and pulls out a slip of paper. The
crowd draws in a collective breath and then you can hear a pin drop, and Im feeling nauseous and so
desperately hoping that its not me, that its not me, that its not me. Effie Trinket crosses back to
the podium, smoothes the slip of paper, and reads out the name in a clear voice. And its not me. Its
Primrose Everdeen.

2.

One time, when I was in a blind in a tree, waiting motionless for game to wander by, I dozed off and
fell ten feet to the ground, landing on my back. It was as if the impact had knocked every wisp of
air from my lungs, and I lay there struggling to inhale, to exhale, to do anything. Thats how I feel
now, trying to remember how to breathe, unable to speak, totally stunned as the name bounces around
the inside of my skull. Someone is gripping my arm, a boy from the Seam, and I think maybe I started
to fall and he caught me. There must have been some mistake. This cant be happening. Prim was one
slip of paper in thousands! Her chances of being chosen so remote that Id not even bothered to worry
about her. Hadnt I done everything? Taken the tesserae, refused to let her do the same? One slip.
One slip in thousands. The odds had been entirely in her favor. But it hadnt mattered. Somewhere far
away, I can hear the crowd murmuring unhappily as they always do when a twelve-year-old gets chosen
because no one thinks this is fair. And then I see her, the blood drained from her face, hands
clenched in fists at her sides, walking with stiff, small steps up toward the stage, passing me, and
I see the back of her blouse has become untucked and hangs out over her skirt. Its this detail, the
untucked blouse forming a ducktail, that brings me back to myself. Prim! The strangled cry comes out
of my throat, and my muscles begin to move again. Prim! I dont need to shove through the crowd. The
other kids make way immediately allowing me a straight path to the stage. I reach her just as she is
about to mount the steps. With one sweep of my arm, I push her behind me. I volunteer! I gasp. I
volunteer as tribute! Theres some confusion on the stage.  District 12 hasnt had a volunteer in
decades and the protocol has become rusty. The rule is that once a tributes name has been pulled
from the ball, another eligible boy, if a boys name has been read, or girl, if a girls name has been
read, can step forward to take his or her place. In some districts, in which winning the reaping is
such a great honor, people are eager to risk their lives, the volunteering is complicated. But in
District 12, where the word tribute is pretty much synonymous with the word corpse, volunteers are
all but extinct. Lovely! says Effie Trinket. But I believe theres a small matter of introducing the
reaping winner and then asking for volunteers, and if one does come forth then we, um . . . She
trails off, unsure herself. What does it matter? says the mayor. Hes looking at me with a pained
expression on his face. He doesnt know me really, but theres a faint recognition there. I am the
girl who brings the strawberries. The girl his daughter might have spoken of on occasion. The girl
who five years ago stood huddled with her mother and sister, as he presented her, the oldest child,
with a medal of valor. A medal for her father, vaporized in the mines. Does he remember that? What
does it matter? he repeats gruffly. Let her come forward. Prim is screaming hysterically behind me.
Shes wrapped her skinny arms around me like a vice. No, Katniss! No! You cant go! Prim, let go, I
say harshly, because this is upsetting me and I dont want to cry. When they televise the replay of
the reapings tonight, everyone will make note of my tears, and Ill be marked as an easy target. A
weakling. I will give no one that satisfaction. Let go! I can feel someone pulling her from my back.
I turn and see Gale has lifted Prim off the ground and shes thrashing in his arms. Up you go,
Catnip, he says, in a voice hes fighting to keep steady, and then he carries Prim off toward my
mother. I steel myself and climb the steps. Well, bravo! gushes Effie Trinket. Thats the spirit of
the Games! Shes pleased to finally have a district with a little action going on in it. Whats your
name? I swallow hard. Katniss Everdeen, I say. I bet my buttons that was your sister. Dont want her
to steal all the glory, do we? Come on, everybody! Lets give a big round of applause to our newest
tribute! trills Effie Trinket. To the everlasting credit of the people of District 12, not one
person claps. Not even the ones holding betting slips, the ones who are usually beyond caring.
Possibly because they know me from the Hob, or knew my father, or have encountered Prim, who no one
can help loving. So instead of acknowledging applause, I stand there unmoving while they take part
in the boldest form of dissent they can manage. Silence. Which says we do not agree. We do not
condone. All of this is wrong. Then something unexpected happens. At least, I dont expect it because
I dont think of District 12 as a place that cares about me. But a shift has occurred since I stepped
up to take Prims place, and now it seems I have become someone precious. At first one, then another,
then almost every member of the crowd touches the three middle fingers of their left hand to their
lips and holds it out to me. It is an old and rarely used gesture of our district, occasionally seen
at funerals. It means thanks, it means admiration, it means good-bye to someone you love. Now I am
truly in danger of crying, but fortunately Haymitch chooses this time to come staggering across the
stage to congratulate me. Look at her. Look at this one! he hollers, throwing an arm around my
shoulders. Hes surprisingly strong for such a wreck. I like her! His breath reeks of liquor and its
been a long time since hes bathed. Lots of . . . He cant think of the word for a while. Spunk! he
says triumphantly. More than you! he releases me and starts for the front of the stage. More than
you! he shouts, pointing directly into a camera. Is he addressing the audience or is he so drunk he
might actually be taunting the Capitol? Ill never know because just as hes opening his mouth to
continue, Haymitch plummets off the stage and knocks himself unconscious. Hes disgusting, but Im
grateful. With every camera gleefully trained on him, I have just enough time to release the small,
choked sound in my throat and compose myself. I put my hands behind my back and stare into the
distance. I can see the hills I climbed this morning with Gale. For a moment, I yearn for something
. . . The idea of us leaving the district . . . Making our way in the woods . . . But I know I was
right about not running off. Because who else would have volunteered for Prim? Haymitch is whisked
away on a stretcher, and Effie Trinket is trying to get the ball rolling again. What an exciting
day! she warbles as she attempts to straighten her wig, which has listed severely to the right. But
more excitement to come! Its time to choose our boy tribute! Clearly hoping to contain her tenuous
hair situation, she plants one hand on her head as she crosses to the ball that contains the boys
names and grabs the first slip she encounters. She zips back to the podium, and I dont even have
time to wish for Gales safety when shes reading the name. Peeta Mellark. Peeta Mellark! Oh, no, I
think. Not him. Because I recognize this name, although I have never spoken directly to its owner.
Peeta Mellark. No, the odds are not in my favor today. I watch him as he makes his way toward the
stage. Medium height, stocky build, ashy blond hair that falls in waves over his forehead. The shock
of the moment is registering on his face, you can see his struggle to remain emotionless, but his
blue eyes show the alarm Ive seen so often in prey. Yet he climbs steadily onto the stage and takes
his place. Effie Trinket asks for volunteers, but no one steps forward. He has two older brothers, I
know, Ive seen them in the bakery, but one is probably too old now to volunteer and the other wont.
This is standard. Family devotion only goes so far for most people on reaping day. What I did was
the radical thing. The mayor begins to read the long, dull Treaty of Treason as he does every year
at this point its required but Im not listening to a word. Why him? I think. Then I try to convince
myself it doesnt matter. Peeta Mellark and I are not friends. Not even neighbors. We dont speak. Our
only real interaction happened years ago. Hes probably forgotten it. But I havent and I know I never
will. . . . It was during the worst time. My father had been killed in the mine accident three
months earlier in the bitterest January anyone could remember. The numbness of his loss had passed,
and the pain would hit me out of nowhere, doubling me over, racking my body with sobs. Where are
you? I would cry out in my mind. Where have you gone? Of course, there was never any answer. The
district had given us a small amount of money as compensation for his death, enough to cover one
month of grieving at which time my mother would be expected to get a job. Only she didnt. She didnt
do anything but sit propped up in a chair or, more often, huddled under the blankets on her bed,
eyes fixed on some point in the distance. Once in a while, shed stir, get up as if moved by some
urgent purpose, only to then collapse back into stillness. No amount of pleading from Prim seemed to
affect her. I was terrified. I suppose now that my mother was locked in some dark world of sadness,
but at the time, all I knew was that I had lost not only a father, but a mother as well. At eleven
years old, with Prim just seven, I took over as head of the family. There was no choice. I bought
our food at the market and cooked it as best I could and tried to keep Prim and myself looking
presentable.  Because if it had become known that my mother could no longer care for us, the
district would have taken us away from her and placed us in the community home. Id grown up seeing
those home kids at school. The sadness, the marks of angry hands on their faces, the hopelessness
that curled their shoulders forward. I could never let that happen to Prim. Sweet, tiny Prim who
cried when I cried before she even knew the reason, who brushed and plaited my mothers hair before
we left for school, who still polished my fathers shaving mirror each night because hed hated the
layer of coal dust that settled on everything in the Seam. The community home would crush her like a
bug. So I kept our predicament a secret. But the money ran out and we were slowly starving to death.
Theres no other way to put it. I kept telling myself if I could only hold out until May, just May
8th, I would turn twelve and be able to sign up for the tesserae and get that precious grain and oil
to feed us. Only there were still several weeks to go. We could well be dead by then. Starvations
not an uncommon fate in District 12. Who hasnt seen the victims? Older people who cant work.
Children from a family with too many to feed. Those injured in the mines. Straggling through the
streets. And one day, you come upon them sitting motionless against a wall or lying in the Meadow,
you hear the wails from a house, and the Peacekeepers are called in to retrieve the body. Starvation
is never the cause of death officially. Its always the flu, or exposure, or pneumonia. But that
fools no one. On the afternoon of my encounter with Peeta Mellark, the rain was falling in
relentless icy sheets. I had been in town, trying to trade some threadbare old baby clothes of Prims
in the public market, but there were no takers. Although I had been to the Hob on several occasions
with my father, I was too frightened to venture into that rough, gritty place alone. The rain had
soaked through my fathers hunting jacket, leaving me chilled to the bone. For three days, wed had
nothing but boiled water with some old dried mint leaves Id found in the back of a cupboard. By the
time the market closed, I was shaking so hard I dropped my bundle of baby clothes in a mud puddle. I
didnt pick it up for fear I would keel over and be unable to regain my feet. Besides, no one wanted
those clothes. I couldnt go home. Because at home was my mother with her dead eyes and my little
sister, with her hollow cheeks and cracked lips. I couldnt walk into that room with the smoky fire
from the damp branches I had scavenged at the edge of the woods after the coal had run out, my bands
empty of any hope. I found myself stumbling along a muddy lane behind the shops that serve the
wealthiest townspeople. The merchants live above their businesses, so I was essentially in their
backyards. I remember the outlines of garden beds not yet planted for the spring, a goat or two in a
pen, one sodden dog tied to a post, hunched defeated in the muck. All forms of stealing are
forbidden in District 12. Punishable by death. But it crossed my mind that there might be something
in the trash bins, and those were fair game. Perhaps a bone at the butchers or rotted vegetables at
the grocers, something no one but my family was desperate enough to eat. Unfortunately, the bins had
just been emptied. When I passed the bakers, the smell of fresh bread was so overwhelming I felt
dizzy. The ovens were in the back, and a golden glow spilled out the open kitchen door. I stood
mesmerized by the heat and the luscious scent until the rain interfered, running its icy fingers
down my back, forcing me back to life. I lifted the lid to the bakers trash bin and found it
spotlessly, heartlessly bare. Suddenly a voice was screaming at me and I looked up to see the bakers
wife, telling me to move on and did I want her to call the Peacekeepers and how sick she was of
having those brats from the Seam pawing through her trash. The words were ugly and I had no defense.
As I carefully replaced the lid and backed away, I noticed him, a boy with blond hair peering out
from behind his mothers back. Id seen him at school. He was in my year, but I didnt know his name.
He stuck with the town kids, so how would I? His mother went back into the bakery, grumbling, but he
must have been watching me as I made my way behind the pen that held their pig and leaned against
the far side of an old apple tree. The realization that Id have nothing to take home had finally
sunk in. My knees buckled and I slid down the tree trunk to its roots. It was too much. I was too
sick and weak and tired, oh, so tired. Let them call the Peacekeepers and take us to the community
home, I thought. Or better yet, let me die right here in the rain. There was a clatter in the bakery
and I heard the woman screaming again and the sound of a blow, and I vaguely wondered what was going
on. Feet sloshed toward me through the mud and I thought, Its her. Shes coming to drive me away with
a stick. But it wasnt her. It was the boy. In his arms, he carried two large loaves of bread that
must have fallen into the fire because the crusts were scorched black. His mother was yelling, Feed
it to the pig, you stupid creature!  Why not? No one decent will buy burned bread! He began to tear
off chunks from the burned parts and toss them into the trough, and the front bakery bell rung and
the mother disappeared to help a customer. The boy never even glanced my way, but I was watching
him. Because of the bread, because of the red weal that stood out on his cheekbone. What had she hit
him with? My parents never hit us. I couldnt even imagine it. The boy took one look back to the
bakery as if checking that the coast was clear, then, his attention back on the pig, he threw a loaf
of bread in my direction. The second quickly followed, and he sloshed back to the bakery, closing
the kitchen door tightly behind him. I stared at the loaves in disbelief. They were fine, perfect
really, except for the burned areas. Did he mean for me to have them? He must have. Because there
they were at my feet. Before anyone could witness what had happened I shoved the loaves up under my
shirt, wrapped the hunting jacket tightly about me, and walked swiftly away. The heat of the bread
burned into my skin, but I clutched it tighter, clinging to life. By the time I reached home, the
loaves had cooled somewhat, but the insides were still warm. When I dropped them on the table, Prims
hands reached to tear off a chunk, but I made her sit, forced my mother to join us at the table, and
poured warm tea. I scraped off the black stuff and sliced the bread. We ate an entire loaf, slice by
slice. It was good hearty bread, filled with raisins and nuts. I put my clothes to dry at the fire,
crawled into bed, and fell into a dreamless sleep. It didnt occur to me until the next morning that
the boy might have burned the bread on purpose. Might have dropped the loaves into the flames,
knowing it meant being punished, and then delivered them to me. But I dismissed this. It must have
been an accident. Why would he have done it? He didnt even know me. Still, just throwing me the
bread was an enormous kindness that would have surely resulted in a beating if discovered. 1 couldnt
explain his actions. We ate slices of bread for breakfast and headed to school. It was as if spring
had come overnight. Warm sweet air. Fluffy clouds. At school, I passed the boy in the hall, his
cheek had swelled up and his eye had blackened. He was with his friends and didnt acknowledge me in
any way. But as I collected Prim and started for home that afternoon, I found him staring at me from
across the school yard. Our eyes met for only a second, then he turned his head away. I dropped my
gaze, embarrassed, and thats when I saw it. The first dandelion of the year. A bell went off in my
head. I thought of the hours spent in the woods with my father and I knew how we were going to
survive. To this day, I can never shake the connection between this boy, Peeta Mellark, and the
bread that gave me hope, and the dandelion that reminded me that I was not doomed. And more than
once, I have turned in the school hallway and caught his eyes trained on me, only to quickly flit
away. I feel like I owe him something, and I hate owing people. Maybe if I had thanked him at some
point, Id be feeling less conflicted now. I thought about it a couple of times, but the opportunity
never seemed to present itself. And now it never will. Because were going to be thrown into an arena
to fight to the death. Exactly how am I supposed to work in a thank-you in there? Somehow it just
wont seem sincere if Im trying to slit his throat. The mayor finishes the dreary Treaty of Treason
and motions for Peeta and me to shake hands. His are as solid and warm as those loaves of bread.
Peeta looks me right in the eye and gives my hand what I think is meant to be a reassuring squeeze.
Maybe its just a nervous spasm. We turn back to face the crowd as the anthem of Panem plays. Oh,
well, I think. There will be twenty-four of us. Odds are someone else will kill him before I do. Of
course, the odds have not been very dependable of late.

3.

The moment the anthem ends, we are taken into custody. I dont mean were handcuffed or anything, but
a group of Peacekeepers marches us through the front door of the Justice Building. Maybe tributes
have tried to escape in the past. Ive never seen that happen though. Once inside, Im conducted to a
room and left alone. Its the richest place Ive ever been in, with thick, deep carpets and a velvet
couch and chairs. I know velvet because my mother has a dress with a collar made of the stuff. When
I sit on the couch, I cant help running my fingers over the fabric repeatedly. It helps to calm me
as I try to prepare for the next hour. The time allotted for the tributes to say goodbye to their
loved ones. I cannot afford to get upset, to leave this room with puffy eyes and a red nose. Crying
is not an option. There will be more cameras at the train station. My sister and my mother come
first. I reach out to Primand she climbs on my lap, her arms around my neck, headon my shoulder,
just like she did when she was a toddler. My mother sits beside me and wraps her arms around us. For
a few minutes, we say nothing. Then I start telling themall the things they must remember to do, now
that I will not be there to do them for them. Prim is not to take any tesserae. They can get by,
iftheyre careful, on selling Prims goat milk and cheese and the small apothecary business my mother
now runs for the people in the Seam. Gale will get her the herbs she doesnt grow herself, but she
must be very careful to describe them because hes not as familiar with them as I am. Hell also bring
them game he and I made a pact about this a year or so ago and will probably not ask for
compensation, but they should thank him with some kind of trade, like milk or medicine. I dont
bother suggesting Prim learn to hunt. I tried to teach her a couple of times and it was disastrous.
The woods terrified her, and whenever I shot something, shed get teary and talk about how we might
be able to heal it if we got it home soon enough. But she makes out well with her goat, so I
concentrate on that. When I am done with instructions about fuel, and trading, and staying in
school, I turn to my mother and grip her arm, hard. Listen to me. Are you listening to me? She nods,
alarmed by my intensity. She must know whats coming. You cant leave again, I say. My mothers eyes
find the floor. I know. I wont. I couldnt help what Well, you have to help it this time. You cant
clock out and leave Prim on her own. Theres no me now to keep you both alive. It doesnt matter what
happens. Whatever you see on the screen. You have to promise me youll fight through it! My voice has
risen to a shout. In it is all the anger, all the fear I felt at her abandonment. She pulls her arm
from my grasp, moved to anger herself now. I was ill. I could have treated myself if Id had the
medicine I have now. That part about her being ill might be true. Ive seen her bring back people
suffering from immobilizing sadness since. Perhaps it is a sickness, but its one we cant afford.
Then take it. And take care of her! I say. Ill be all right, Katniss, says Prim, clasping my face in
her hands. But you have to take care, too. Youre so fast and brave. Maybe you can win. I cant win.
Prim must know that in her heart. The competition will be far beyond my abilities. Kids from
wealthier districts, where winning is a huge honor, whove been trained their whole lives for this.
Boys who are two to three times my size. Girls who know twenty different ways to kill you with a
knife. Oh, therell be people like me, too. People to weed out before the real fun begins. Maybe, I
say, because I can hardly tell my mother to carry on if Ive already given up myself. Besides, it
isnt in my nature to go down without a fight, even when things seem insurmountable. Then wed be rich
as Haymitch. I dont care if were rich. I just want you to come home. You will try, wont you? Really,
really try? asks Prim. Really, really try. I swear it, I say. And I know, because of Prim, Ill have
to. And then the Peacekeeper is at the door, signaling our time is up, and were all hugging one
another so hard it hurts and all Im saying is I love you. I love you both. And theyre saying it back
and then the Peacekeeper orders them out and the door closes. I bury my head in one of the velvet
pillows as if this can block the whole thing out. Someone else enters the room, and when I look up,
Im surprised to see its the baker, Peeta Mellarks father. I cant believe hes come to visit me. After
all, Ill be trying to kill his son soon. But we do know each other a bit, and he knows Prim even
better. When she sells her goat cheeses at the Hob, she puts two of them aside for him and he gives
her a generous amount of bread in return. We always wait to trade with him when his witch of a wife
isnt around because hes so much nicer. I feel certain he would never have hit his son the way she
did over the burned bread. But why has he come to see me? The baker sits awkwardly on the edge of
one of the plush chairs. Hes a big, broad-shouldered man with burn scars from years at the ovens. He
must have just said goodbye to his son. He pulls a white paper package from his jacket pocket and
holds it out to me. I open it and find cookies. These are a luxury we can never afford. Thank you, I
say. The bakers not a very talkative man in the best of times, and today he has no words at all. I
had some of your bread this morning. My friend Gale gave you a squirrel for it. He nods, as if
remembering the squirrel. Not your best trade, I say. He shrugs as if it couldnt possibly matter.
Then I cant think of anything else, so we sit in silence until a Peacemaker summons him. He rises
and coughs to clear his throat. Ill keep an eye on the little girl. Make sure shes eating. I feel
some of the pressure in my chest lighten at his words. People deal with me, but they are genuinely
fond of Prim. Maybe there will be enough fondness to keep her alive. My next guest is also
unexpected. Madge walks straight to me. She is not weepy or evasive, instead theres an urgency about
her tone that surprises me. They let you wear one thing from your district in the arena. One thing
to remind you of home. Will you wear this? She holds out the circular gold pin that was on her dress
earlier. I hadnt paid much attention to it before, but now I see its a small bird in flight. Your
pin? I say. Wearing a token from my district is about the last thing on my mind. Here, Ill put it on
your dress, all right? Madge doesnt wait for an answer, she just leans in and fixes the bird to my
dress. Promise youll wear it into the arena, Katniss? she asks. Promise? Yes, I say. Cookies. A pin.
Im getting all kinds of gifts today. Madge gives me one more. A kiss on the cheek. Then shes gone
and Im left thinking that maybe Madge really has been my friend all along. Finally, Gale is here and
maybe there is nothing romantic between us, but when he opens his arms I dont hesitate to go into
them. His body is familiar to me the way it moves, the smell of wood smoke, even the sound of his
heart beating I know from quiet moments on a hunt but this is the first time I really feel it, lean
and hard-muscled against my own. Listen, he says. Getting a knife should be pretty easy, but youve
got to get your hands on a bow. Thats your best chance. They dont always have bows, I say, thinking
of the year there were only horrible spiked maces that the tributes had to bludgeon one another to
death with. Then make one, says Gale. Even a weak bow is better than no bow at all. I have tried
copying my fathers bows with poor results. Its not that easy. Even he had to scrap his own work
sometimes. I dont even know if therell be wood, I say. Another year, they tossed everybody into a
landscape of nothing but boulders and sand and scruffy bushes. I particularly hated that year. Many
contestants were bitten by venomous snakes or went insane from thirst. Theres almost always some
wood, Gale says. Since that year half of them died of cold. Not much entertainment in that. Its
true. We spent one Hunger Games watching the players freeze to death at night. You could hardly see
them because they were just huddled in balls and had no wood for fires or torches or anything. It
was considered very anti-climactic in the Capitol, all those quiet, bloodless deaths. Since then,
theres usually been wood to make fires. Yes, theres usually some, I say. Katniss, its just hunting.
Youre the best hunter I know, says Gale. Its not just hunting. Theyre armed. They think, I say. So
do you. And youve had more practice. Real practice, he says. You know how to kill. Not people, I
say. How different can it be, really? says Gale grimly. The awful thing is that if I can forget
theyre people, it will be no different at all. The Peacekeepers are back too soon and Gale asks for
more time, but theyre taking him away and I start to panic. Dont let them starve! I cry out,
clinging to his hand. I wont! You know I wont! Katniss, remember I he says, and they yank us apart
and slam the door and Ill never know what it was he wanted me to remember. Its a short ride from the
Justice Building to the train station. Ive never been in a car before. Rarely even ridden in wagons.
In the Seam, we travel on foot. Ive been right not to cry. The station is swarming with reporters
with their insectlike cameras trained directly on my face. But Ive had a lot of practice at wiping
my face clean of emotions and I do this now. I catch a glimpse of myself on the television screen on
the wall thats airing my arrival live and feel gratified that I appear almost bored. Peeta Mellark,
on the other hand, has obviously been crying and interestingly enough does not seem to be trying to
cover it up. I immediately wonder if this will be his strategy in the Games. To appear weak and
frightened, to reassure the other tributes that he is no competition at all, and then come out
fighting. This worked very well for a girl, Johanna Mason, from District 7 a few years back. She
seemed like such a sniveling, cowardly fool that no one bothered about her until there were only a
handful of contestants left. It turned out she could kill viciously. Pretty clever, the way she
played it. But this seems an odd strategy for Peeta Mellark because hes a bakers son. All those
years of having enough to eat and hauling bread trays around have made him broad-shouldered and
strong. It will take an awful lot of weeping to convince anyone to overlook him. We have to stand
for a few minutes in the doorway of the train while the cameras gobble up our images, then were
allowed inside and the doors close mercifully behind us. The train begins to move at once. The speed
initially takes my breath away. Of course, Ive never been on a train, as travel between the
districts is forbidden except for officially sanctioned duties. For us, thats mainly transporting
coal. But this is no ordinary coal train. Its one of the high-speed Capitol models that average 250
miles per hour. Our journey to the Capitol will take less than a day. In school, they tell us the
Capitol was built in a place once called the Rockies. District 12 was in a region known is
Appalachia. Even hundreds of years ago, they mined coal here. Which is why our miners have to dig so
deep. Somehow it all comes back to coal at school. Besides basic reading and math most of our
instruction is coal-related. Except for the weekly lecture on the history of Panem. Its mostly a lot
of blather about what we owe the Capitol. I know there must be more than theyre telling us, an
actual account of what happened during the rebellion. But I dont spend much time thinking about it.
Whatever the truth is, I dont see how it will help me get food on the table. The tribute train is
fancier than even the room in the Justice Building. We are each given our own chambers that have a
bedroom, a dressing area, and a private bathroom with hot and cold running water. We dont have hot
water at home, unless we boil it. There are drawers filled with fine clothes, and Effie Trinket
tells me to do anything I want, wear anything I want, everything is at my disposal. Just be ready
for supper in an hour. I peel off my mothers blue dress and take a hot shower. Ive never had a
shower before. Its like being in a summer rain, only warmer. I dress in a dark green shirt and
pants. At the last minute, I remember Madges little gold pin. For the first time, I get a good look
at it. Its as if someone fashioned a small golden bird and then attached a ring around it. The bird
is connected to the ring only by its wing tips. I suddenly recognize it. A mocking jay. Theyre funny
birds and something of a slap in the face to the Capitol. During the rebellion, the Capitol bred a
series of genetically altered animals as weapons. The common term for them was muttations, or
sometimes mutts for short. One was a special bird called a jabber jay that had the ability to
memorize and repeat whole human conversations. They were homing birds, exclusively male, that were
released into regions where the Capitols enemies were known to be hiding. After the birds gathered
words, theyd fly back to centers to be recorded. It took people awhile to realize what was going on
in the districts, how private conversations were being transmitted. Then, of course, the rebels fed
the Capitol endless lies, and the joke was on it. So the centers were shut down and the birds were
abandoned to die off in the wild. Only they didnt die off. Instead, the jabber jays mated with
female mockingbirds creating a whole new species that could replicate both bird whistles and human
melodies. They had lost the ability to enunciate words but could still mimic a range of human vocal
sounds, from a childs high-pitched warble to a mans deep tones. And they could re-create songs. Not
just a few notes, but whole songs with multiple verses, if you had the patience to sing them and if
they liked your voice. My father was particularly fond of mockingjays. When we went hunting, he
would whistle or sing complicated songs to them and, after a polite pause, theyd always sing back.
Not everyone is treated with such respect. But whenever my father sang, all the birds in the area
would fall silent and listen. His voice was that beautiful, high and clear and so filled with life
it made you want to laugh and cry at the same time. I could never bring myself to continue the
practice after he was gone. Still, theres something comforting about the little bird. Its like
having a piece of my father with me, protecting me. I fasten the pin onto my shirt, and with the
dark green fabric as a background, I can almost imagine the mockingjay flying through the trees.
Effie Trinket comes to collect me for supper. I follow her through the narrow, rocking corridor into
a dining room with polished paneled walls. Theres a table where all the dishes are highly breakable.
Peeta Mellark sits waiting for us, the chair next to him empty. Wheres Haymitch? asks Effie Trinket
brightly. Last time I saw him, he said he was going to take a nap, says Peeta. Well, its been an
exhausting day, says Effie Trinket. I think shes relieved by Haymitchs absence, and who can blame
her? The supper comes in courses. A thick carrot soup, green salad, lamb chops and mashed potatoes,
cheese and fruit, a chocolate cake. Throughout the meal, Effie Trinket keeps reminding us to save
space because theres more to come. But Im stuffing myself because Ive never had food like this, so
good and so much, and because probably the best thing I can do between now and the Games is put on a
few pounds. At least, you two have decent manners, says Effie as were finishing the main course. The
pair last year ate everything with their hands like a couple of savages. It completely upset my
digestion. The pair last year were two kids from the Seam whod never, not one day of their lives,
had enough to eat. And when they did have food, table manners were surely the last thing on their
minds. Peetas a bakers son. My mother taught Prim and I to eat properly, so yes, I can handle a fork
and knife. But I hate Effie Trinkets comment so much I make a point of eating the rest of my meal
with my fingers. Then I wipe my hands on the tablecloth. This makes her purse her lips tightly
together. Now that the meals over, Im fighting to keep the food down. I can see Peetas looking a
little green, too. Neither of our stomachs is used to such rich fare. But if I can hold down Greasy
Saes concoction of mice meat, pig entrails, and tree bark a winter specialty Im determined to hang
on to this. We go to another compartment to watch the recap of the reapings across Panem. They try
to stagger them throughout the day so a person could conceivably watch the whole thing live, but
only people in the Capitol could really do that, since none of them have to attend reapings
themselves. One by one, we see the other reapings, the names called, (the volunteers stepping
forward or, more often, not. We examine the faces of the kids who will be our competition. A few
stand out in my mind. A monstrous boy who lunges forward to volunteer from District 2. A fox-faced
girl with sleek red hair from District 5. A boy with a crippled foot from District 10. And most
hauntingly, a twelve-year-old girl from District 11. She has dark brown skin and eyes, but other
than that, shes very like Prim in size and demeanor. Only when she mounts the stage and they ask for
volunteers, all you can hear is the wind whistling through the decrepit buildings around her. Theres
no one willing to take her place. Last of all, they show District 12. Prim being called, me running
forward to volunteer. You cant miss the desperation in my voice as I shove Prim behind me, as if Im
afraid no one will hear and theyll take Prim away. But, of course, they do hear. I see Gale pulling
her off me and watch myself mount the stage. The commentators are not sure what to say about the
crowds refusal to applaud. The silent salute. One says that District 12 has always been a bit
backward but that local customs can be charming. As if on cue, Haymitch falls off the stage, and
they groan comically. Peetas name is drawn, and he quietly takes his place. We shake hands. They cut
to the anthem again, and the pro-gram ends. Effie Trinket is disgruntled about the state her wig was
in. Your mentor has a lot to learn about presentation. A lot about televised behavior. Peeta
unexpectedly laughs. He was drunk, says Peeta. Hes drunk every year. Every day, I add. I cant help
smirking a little. Effie Trinket makes it sound like Haymitch just has somewhat rough manners that
could be corrected with a few tips from her. Yes, hisses Effie Trinket. How odd you two find it
amusing. You know your mentor is your lifeline to the world in these Games. The one who advises you,
lines up your sponsors, and dictates the presentation of any gifts. Haymitch can well be the
difference between your life and your death! Just then, Haymitch staggers into the compartment. I
miss supper? he says in a slurred voice. Then he vomits all over the expensive carpet and falls in
the mess. So laugh away! says Effie Trinket. She hops in her pointy shoes around the pool of vomit
and flees the room.

4.

For a few moments, Peeta and I take in the scene of our mentor trying to rise out of the slippery
vile stuff from his stomach. The reek of vomit and raw spirits almost brings my dinner up. We
exchange a glance. Obviously Haymitch isnt much, but Effie Trinket is right about one thing, once
were in the arena hes all weve got. As if by some unspoken agreement, Peeta and I each take one of
Haymitchs arms and help him to his feet. I tripped? Haymitch asks. Smells bad. He wipes his hand on
his nose, smearing his face with vomit. Lets get you back to your room, says Peeta. Clean you up a
bit. We half-lead half-carry Haymitch back to his compartment. Since we cant exactly set him down on
the embroidered bedspread, we haul him into the bathtub and turn the shower on him. He hardly
notices. Its okay, Peeta says to me. Ill take it from here. I cant help feeling a little grateful
since the last thing I want to do is strip down Haymitch, wash the vomit out of his chest hair, and
tuck him into bed. Possibly Peeta is trying to make a good impression on him, to be his favorite
once the Games begin. But judging by the state hes in, Haymitch will have no memory of this
tomorrow. All right, I say. I can send one of the Capitol people to help you. Theres any number on
the train. Cooking for us. Waiting on us. Guarding us. Taking care of us is their job. No. I dont
want them, says Peeta. I nod and head to my own room. I understand how Peeta feels. I cant stand the
sight of the Capitol people myself. But making them deal with Haymitch might be a small form of
revenge. So Im pondering the reason why he insists on taking care of Haymitch and all of a sudden I
think, Its because hes being kind. Just as he was kind to give me the bread. The idea pulls me up
short. A kind Peeta Mellark is far more dangerous to me than an unkind one. Kind people have a way
of working their way inside me and rooting there. And I cant let Peeta do this.  Not where were
going. So I decide, from this moment on, to have as little as possible to do with the bakers son.
When I get back to my room, the train is pausing at a platform to refuel. I quickly open the window,
toss the cookies Peetas father gave me out of the train, and slam the glass shut. No more. No more
of either of them. Unfortunately, the packet of cookies hits the ground and bursts open in a patch
of dandelions by the track. I only see the image for a moment, because the train is off again, but
its enough. Enough to remind me of that other dandelion in the school yard years ago . . . I had
just turned away from Peeta Mellarks bruised face when I saw the dandelion and I knew hope wasnt
lost. I plucked it carefully and hurried home. I grabbed a bucket and Prims hand and headed to the
Meadow and yes, it was dotted with the golden-headed weeds. After wed harvested those, we scrounged
along inside the fence for probably a mile until wed filled the bucket with the dandelion greens,
stems, and flowers. That night, we gorged ourselves on dandelion salad and the rest of the bakery
bread. What else? Prim asked me. What other food can we find? All kinds of things, I promised her. I
just have to remember them. My mother had a book shed brought with her from the apothecary shop. The
pages were made of old parchment and covered in ink drawings of plants. Neat handwritten blocks told
their names, where to gather them, when they came in bloom, their medical uses. But my father added
other entries to the book. Plants for eating, not healing. Dandelions, pokeweed, wild onions, pines.
Prim and I spent the rest of the night poring over those pages. The next day, we were off school.
For a while I hung around the edges of the Meadow, but finally I worked up the courage to go under
the fence. It was the first time Id been there alone, without my fathers weapons to protect me. But
I retrieved the small bow and arrows hed made me from a hollow tree. I probably didnt go more than
twenty yards into the woods that day. Most of the time, I perched up in the branches of an old oak,
hoping for game to come by. After several hours, I had the good luck to kill a rabbit. Id shot a few
rabbits before, with my fathers guidance. But this Id done on my own. We hadnt had meat in months.
The sight of the rabbit seemed to stir something in my mother. She roused herself, skinned the
carcass, and made a stew with the meat and some more greens Prim had gathered. Then she acted
confused and went back to bed, but when the stew was done, we made her eat a bowl. The woods became
our savior, and each day I went a bit farther into its arms. It was slow-going at first, but I was
determined to feed us. I stole eggs from nests, caught fish in nets, sometimes managed to shoot a
squirrel or rabbit for stew, and gathered the various plants that sprung up beneath my feet. Plants
are tricky. Many are edible, but one false mouthful and youre dead. I checked and double-checked the
plants I harvested with my fathers pictures. I kept us alive. Any sign of danger, a distant howl,
the inexplicable break of a branch, sent me flying back to the fence at first. Then I began to risk
climbing trees to escape the wild dogs that quickly got bored and moved on. Bears and cats lived
deeper in, perhaps disliking the sooty reek of our district. On May 8th, I went to the Justice
Building, signed up for my tesserae, and pulled home my first batch of grain and oil in Prims toy
wagon. On the eighth of every month, I was entitled to do the same. I couldnt stop hunting and
gathering, of course. The grain was not enough to live on, and there were other things to buy, soap
and milk and thread. What we didnt absolutely have to eat, I began to trade at the Hob. It was
frightening to enter that place without my father at my side, but people had respected him, and they
accepted me. Game was game after all, no matter whod shot it. I also sold at the back doors of the
wealthier clients in town, trying to remember what my father had told me and learning a few new
tricks as well. The butcher would buy my rabbits but not squirrels. The baker enjoyed squirrel but
would only trade for one if his wife wasnt around. The Head Peacekeeper loved wild turkey. The mayor
had a passion for strawberries. In late summer, I was washing up in a pond when I noticed the plants
growing around me. Tall with leaves like arrowheads. Blossoms with three white petals. I knelt down
in the water, my fingers digging into the soft mud, and I pulled up handfuls of the roots. Small,
bluish tubers that dont look like much but boiled or baked are as good as any potato. Katniss, I
said aloud. Its the plant I was named for. And I heard my fathers voice joking, As long as you can
find yourself, youll never starve. I spent hours stirring up the pond bed with my toes and a stick,
gathering the tubers that floated to the top.  That night, we feasted on fish and Katniss roots
until we were all, for the first time in months, full. Slowly, my mother returned to us. She began
to clean and cook and preserve some of the food I brought in for winter. People traded us or paid
money for her medical remedies. One day, I heard her singing. Prim was thrilled to have her back,
but I kept watching, waiting for her to disappear on us again. I didnt trust her. And some small
gnarled place inside me hated her for her weakness, for her neglect, for the months she had put us
through. Prim forgave her, but I had taken a step back from my mother, put up a wall to protect
myself from needing her, and nothing was ever the same between us again. Now I was going to die
without that ever being set right. I thought of how I had yelled at her today in the Justice
Building. I had told her I loved her, too, though. So maybe it would all balance out. For a while I
stand staring out the train window, wishing I could open it again, but unsure of what would happen
at such high speed. In the distance, I see the lights of another district. 7? 10? I dont know. I
think about the people in their houses, settling in for bed. I imagine my home, with its shutters
drawn tight. What are they doing now, my mother and Prim? Were they able to eat supper? The fish
stew and the strawberries? Or did it lay untouched on their plates? Did they watch the recap of the
days events on the battered old TV that sits on the table against the wall? Surely, there were more
tears. Is my mother holding up, being strong for Prim? Or has she already started to slip away,
leaving the weight of the world on my sisters fragile shoulders? Prim will undoubtedly sleep with my
mother tonight. The thought of that scruffy old Buttercup posting himself on the bed to watch over
Prim comforts me. If she cries, he will nose his way into her arms and curl up there until she calms
down and falls asleep. Im so glad I didnt drown him. Imagining my home makes me ache with
loneliness. This day has been endless. Could Gale and I have been eating blackberries only this
morning? It seems like a lifetime ago. Like a long dream that deteriorated into a nightmare. Maybe,
if I go to sleep, I will wake up back in District 12, where I belong. Probably the drawers hold any
number of nightgowns, but I just strip off my shirt and pants and climb into bed in my underwear.
The sheets are made of soft, silky fabric. A thick fluffy comforter gives immediate warmth. If Im
going to cry, now is the time to do it. By morning, Ill be able to wash the damage done by the tears
from my face. But no tears come. Im too tired or too numb to cry. The only thing I feel is a desire
to be somewhere else. So I let the train rock me into oblivion. Gray light is leaking through the
curtains when the rapping rouses me. I hear Effie Trinkets voice, calling me to rise. Up, up, up!
Its going to be a big, big, big day! I try and imagine, for a moment, what it must be like inside
that womans head. What thoughts fill her waking hours? What dreams come to her at night? I have no
idea. I put the green outfit back on since its not really dirty, just slightly crumpled from
spending the night on the floor. My fingers trace the circle around the little gold mockingjay and I
think of the woods, and of my father, and of my mother and Prim waking up, having to get on with
things. I slept in the elaborate braided hair my mother did for the reaping and it doesnt look too
bad, so I just leave it up. It doesnt matter. We cant be far from the Capitol now. And once we reach
the city, my stylist will dictate my look for the opening ceremonies tonight anyway. I just hope I
get one who doesnt think nudity is the last word in fashion. As I enter the dining car, Effie
Trinket brushes by me with a cup of black coffee. Shes muttering obscenities under her breath.
Haymitch, his face puffy and red from the previous days indulgences, is chuckling. Peeta holds a
roll and looks somewhat embarrassed.Sit down! Sit down! says Haymitch, waving me over. The moment I
slide into my chair Im served an enormous platter of food. Eggs, ham, piles of fried potatoes. A
tureen of fruit sits in ice to keep it chilled. The basket of rolls they set before me would keep my
family going for a week. Theres an elegant glass of orange juice. At least, I think its orange
juice. Ive only even tasted an orange once, at New Years when my father bought one as a special
treat. A cup of coffee. My mother adores coffee, which we could almost never afford, but it only
tastes bitter and thin to me. A rich brown cup of something Ive never seen. They call it hot
chocolate, says Peeta. Its good. I take a sip of the hot, sweet, creamy liquid and a shudder runs
through me. Even though the rest of the meal beckons, I ignore it until Ive drained my cup. Then I
stuff down every mouthful I can hold, which is a substantial amount, being careful to not overdo it
on the richest stuff. One time, my mother told me that I always eat like Ill never see food again.
And I said, I wont unless I bring it home. That shut her up. When my stomach feels like its about to
split open, I lean back and take in my breakfast companions. Peeta is still eating, breaking off
bits of roll and dipping them in hot chocolate. Haymitch hasnt paid much attention to his platter,
but hes knocking back a glass of red juice that he keeps thinning with a clear liquid from a bottle.
Judging by the fumes, its some kind of spirit. I dont know Haymitch, but Ive seen him often enough
in the Hob, tossing handfuls of money on the counter of the woman who sells white liquor. Hell be
incoherent by the time we reach the Capitol. I realize I detest Haymitch. No wonder the District 12
tributes never stand a chance. It isnt just that weve been underfed and lack training. Some of our
tributes have still been strong enough to make a go of it. But we rarely get sponsors and hes a big
part of the reason why. The rich people who back tributes either because theyre betting on them or
simply for the bragging rights of picking a winner expect someone classier than Haymitch to deal
with. So, youre supposed to give us advice, I say to Haymitch. Heres some advice. Stay alive, says
Haymitch, and then bursts out laughing. I exchange a look with Peeta before I remember Im having
nothing more to do with him. Im surprised to see the hardness in his eyes. He generally seems so
mild. Thats very funny, says Peeta. Suddenly he lashes out at the glass in Haymitchs hand. It
shatters on the floor, sending the bloodred liquid running toward the back of the train. Only not to
us. Haymitch considers this a moment, then punches Peeta in the jaw, knocking him from his chair.
When he turns back to reach for the spirits, I drive my knife into the table between his hand and
the bottle, barely missing his fingers. I brace myself to deflect his hit, but it doesnt come.
Instead he sits back and squints at us. Well, whats this? says Haymitch. Did I actually get a pair
of fighters this year? Peeta rises from the floor and scoops up a handful of ice from under the
fruit tureen. He starts to raise it to the red mark on his jaw. No, says Haymitch, stopping him. Let
the bruise show. The audience will think youve mixed it up with another tribute before youve even
made it to the arena. Thats against the rules, says Peeta. Only if they catch you. That bruise will
say you fought, you werent caught, even better, says Haymitch. He turns to me. Can you hit anything
with that knife besides a table? The bow and arrow is my weapon. But Ive spent a fair amount of time
throwing knives as well. Sometimes, if Ive wounded an animal with an arrow, its better to get a
knife into it, too, before I approach it. I realize that if I want Haymitchs attention, this is my
moment to make an impression. I yank the knife out of the table, get a grip on the blade, and then
throw it into the wall across the room. I was actually just hoping to get a good solid stick, but it
lodges in the seam between two panels, making me look a lot better than I am. Stand over here. Both
of you, says Haymitch, nodding to the middle of the room. We obey and he circles us, prodding us
like animals at times, checking our muscles, examining our faces. Well, youre not entirely hopeless.
Seem fit. And once the stylists get hold of you, youll be attractive enough. Peeta and I dont
question this. The Hunger Games arent a beauty contest, but the best-looking tributes always seem to
pull more sponsors. All right, Ill make a deal with you. You dont interfere with my drinking, and
Ill stay sober enough to help you, says Haymitch. But you have to do exactly what I say. Its not
much of a deal but still a giant step forward from ten minutes ago when we had no guide at all.
Fine, says Peeta. So help us, I say. When we get to the arena, whats the best strategy at the
Cornucopia for someone One thing at a time. In a few minutes, well be pulling into the station.
Youll be put in the hands of your stylists. Youre not going to like what they do to you. But no
matter what it is, dont resist, says Haymitch. But I begin. No buts. Dont resist, says Haymitch. He
takes the bottle of spirits from the table and leaves the car. As the door swings shut behind him,
the car goes dark. There are still a few lights inside, but outside its as if night has fallen
again. I realize we must be in the tunnel that runs up through the mountains into the Capitol. The
mountains form a natural barrier between the Capitol and the eastern districts. It is almost
impossible to enter from the east except through the tunnels. This geographical advantage was a
major factor in the districts losing the war that led to my being a tribute today. Since the rebels
had to scale the mountains, they were easy targets for the Capitols air forces. Peeta Mellark and I
stand in silence as the train speeds along. The tunnel goes on and on and I think of the tons of
rock separating me from the sky, and my chest tightens. I hate being encased in stone this way. It
reminds me of the mines and my father, trapped, unable to reach sunlight, buried forever in the
darkness. The train finally begins to slow and suddenly bright light floods the compartment. We cant
help it. Both Peeta and I run to the window to see what weve only seen on television, the Capitol,
the ruling city of Panem. The cameras havent lied about its grandeur. If anything, they have not
quite captured the magnificence of the glistening buildings in a rainbow of hues that tower into the
air, the shiny cars that roll down the wide paved streets, the oddly dressed people with bizarre
hair and painted faces who have never missed a meal. All the colors seem artificial, the pinks too
deep, the greens too bright, the yellows painful to the eyes, like the flat round disks of hard
candy we can never afford to buy at the tiny sweet shop in District 12. The people begin to point at
us eagerly as they recognize a tribute train rolling into the city. I step away from the window,
sickened by their excitement, knowing they cant wait to watch us die. But Peeta holds his ground,
actually waving and smiling at the gawking crowd. He only stops when the train pulls into the
station, blocking us from their view. He sees me staring at him and shrugs. Who knows? he says. One
of them may be rich. I have misjudged him. I think of his actions since the reaping began. The
friendly squeeze of my hand. His father showing up with the cookies and promising to feed Prim . . .
Did Peeta put him up to that? His tears at the station. Volunteering to wash Haymitch but then
challenging him this morning when apparently the nice-guy approach had failed. And now the waving at
the window, already trying to win the crowd. All of the pieces are still fitting together, but I
sense he has a plan forming. He hasnt accepted his death. He is already fighting hard to stay alive.
Which also means that kind Peeta Mellark, the boy who gave me the bread, is fighting hard to kill
me.